Hello everyone.
In this lecture, we will use our tools
that we have acquired until now.
And we'll try to fit an ARIMA
model into a real life dataset.
Dataset is called daily female
births in California in 1959.
So we're going to look
at the time series for
whole year and
the frequencies for every day.
It's going to be daily time series.
And we'll have a number of female births
at each day in California in 1959.
Objectives are to fit an ARIMA
model to a real world data set.
To judge various fitting tools,
such as ACF, PACF, and AIC.
And to examine Ljung-Box Q-statistics for
testing if there's
an autocorrelation in a time series.
As you remember, this is our basically
guideline for modelling a time series.
We're going to look at if
there's a trend in the data,
if there's a difference in the variation,
if we need transformation or not.
And then we're going to look at ACF, PACF.
Akaike Information Criterion,
sum of squared errors, and
also Ljung-Box Q-statistics.
And at the end of the day,
we're going to use R to estimate
our perimeters in the model.
Okay, so this data that is coming from
Time Series Data Library which is TSDL,
it is created by Rob Hyndman,
Professor of statistics at
Monash University, Australia.
And there's a link here,
you can go directly to the library.
And the category that I chose
was demography, so this dataset,
daily total female births in California
is under category Demography.
It is a time series from January 1, 1959,
to December 31, 1959, for 365 days.
It's a daily time series.
There's a direct link here that will
take you directly to the time series.
And what we're going to
do once we are there,
we are going to export
the data as a CSV file.
We're going to open the file, clean up the
bottom row because there might be extra
rows in the bottom we don't need.
And then, either put this file into
your working directory in R or
directly read it from whatever it is
downloaded to the R, using its path.
If you use that link directly,
we go to the daily total female births in
California 1959,
there's an export button here, so
if I click this export,
I can export this in the various format.
I'm going to use CSV, and
if I do that it automatically downloads,
basically daily total
female births in 1959.
We can open it.
Once you open the file,
it will have a date and a daily total
female births in California in 1959.
These are the dates and
these are the number of the births.
If you go to the bottom of the file,
there's extra row that we don't need so
we might want to delete this and save it.
Now we are ready to use this dataset and
read it to R.
And we'll start modeling this time series.
So I have R Studio here up and
running, and
I have written a little code
called Birth_California_1959.
And this code is provided to you.
There's the information
we just talked about, and
when we start with the library or some
of you might need it, so you can run it.
And now we're going to read, so read the
time series we downloaded in the CSV file.
And I put that file into
my working directly, so
I'm going to directly read it
into a variable called birthdata.
And from birth data I'm
going to pull out the column
that's actually number of births.
And we're going to call
it number_of_births.
And we're going to format
the date as month, day, and year.
And we're going to plot the data on the
right hand side here plus plot the data.
Once we have the birth,
let's plot our dataset.
And when we plot it,
you see that we have this Daily
total female births in California.
This is our time series.
This is our Date, and
this is the Number of births.
As you can see, this is definitely
not a stationary time series.
There's some kind of trend going on.
So maybe we should need to
remove the trend later on, but
lets first check Q-statistic.
In other words, is there a correlation or
after correlation among different
lags of this time series?
And we're going to use
box test as we said.
Box-test, this is the name of
the dataset and this is the lag that we
said we're going to use the logarithm
of the length of that time series.
If we use this Ljung-Box test,
we obtain the following
p-value and then p-value is actually very,
very small,
which is smaller than any significance
level you would choose like 0.005 or
0.001.
So there is definitely after correlations,
so we can fit somewhere the model, ARIMA
model may be here, some linear model,
and try to pull the linear part of it.
And then we're going to look
again to its residuals,
maybe there's other correlation there,
maybe there's not.
So we hope that we will get
some white noise there.
Okay, so, as we can see, there's maybe
some kind of trend going on here.
So, in order to remove a trend,
we're going to use a differencing
operator, which is DIFF.
So that's what we are going to do.
So let's plot our different time series.
This is our difference time series.
This is our date and we get some kind
of maybe a stationary time series.
There is a little bit peak
on September 2nd if you
look at the time series there's
September 2nd which is exactly
nine months after December 31st.
We can attribute this to randomness,
so we can say that,
okay, maybe we can ignore this outlier.
Then we basically have some
stationery time series.
And let's look at the auto correlation
theories and the auto correlation here
we're going to use, again, box test for
the difference of the time series.
And if you run this,
we obtain, again, very,
very small p-value, so
there's definitely some autocorrelations.
Let's look at ACF, I told you
before that ACF will also suggest
that there might be some autocorrelations.
This is the ACF of the difference data.
If I look at the ACF, we see that
there's a significant lag at lag 1.
And then there's one peak at lag 21 maybe.
So maybe we can ignore this and
we can refer to this randomness.
Maybe this is a random peak.
And if you can ignore that,
then maybe we have two significant peaks.
This is lag zero, which is always one,
and we have some lag one here.
Autocorrelation functions suggest
order for the moving average process.
If I look at the PACF or
partial auto-correlation function.
We obtain the following.
We see a lot of significant peaks
if even if we ignore lag 21.
We can see that there is a lot
of significant lags until lag 7.
Okay, so we have various competing
model we're going to have to try.
So first we're going to
try to fit ARIMA model,
the to number_of _births
with order 0,1,1 all of them
will have to have 1,
because we have the difference the data.
So this time, I'm going to look
at the model basically MA1 for
the difference data.
This is model MA2 for the difference data.
This is basically ARIMA71 for
the difference data.
So ARIMA711,
we again look at ARIMA712 because PACF
tells us that there might be the order
of [INAUDIBLE] process is 7.
And, ACF actually
tells that maybe order of
MAQ processes is one or two.
Okay, so
this model one is our ARIMA 0,1,1,
I'm going to pull out some
of the squared errors.
In other words, I'm going to look
at the residuals square them and
sum them up and
we're going to call this SSE1.
We want this to be as small as possible.
We're going to also look at the residual.
In other words, once we model our time
series with Arima(0,1,1) let's say,
then we have residual.
We hope not to have any
autocorrelation in the residual.
We would like to have some
white noise in the residual.
So we're going to take Model 1 residuals.
We're going to look at the box test and
that's going to be called Model 1 Test.
And we're going to look at its p-values.
And so we continue this process for
different models, Arima(0,1,1),
Arima(0,1,2), Arima(7,1,1), Arima(7,1,2).
And we have some of the squares of
errors and we also have the R test.
I'm going to define a data frame df,
it's going to have
the row names AIC which is
Akaike information criterion.
It's going to have some of squared errors,
is going to have p-value.
And then I'm going to take for
example model1 AIC value, SSE1,
sum of squares errors for the model1,
and I'm going to take model one test and
I'm going to look at the p-value of it.
We're going to do this for
every single model.
So, let's do this.
Let's go back here and run these commands.
Model1, model2, model3,
model4, and now we have our data frame.
I'm going to call the column names are
Arima(0,1,1), Arima(0,1,2), and so forth.
And then I'm going to format it without
using these scientific notation and
at this point I should get my results.
So as you can see here, my data frame
without the scientific notation basically
are, I have AIC values and
I have sum of squared errors.
And I have p-values.
Remember what p-values are,
p-values are trying to see if there is
an autocorrelation in the residuals.
As you can see from all of the p-values,
none of the residuals have
significant auto correlation, so we can
assume that there is no autocorrelation.
We cannot reject the null hypothesis,
there's no autocorrelation
in the residuals.
Let's look at the AIC values.
AIC values, as you can see, is 2462,
2459, 2464, 2466.
The minimum value is 2459.
So if you are going with
the minimum AIC value,
our model is going to be
basically Arima(0,1,2).
If we are looking at the smallest SSE
values, sum of the squared errors,
it seems like the smallest
error is actually 17,574,
which will tell us Arima(7,1,2) model.
But if you have Arima(7,1,2) model,
7 plus 1 plus 2,
you have 10 parameters in the model.
So if you are using, trying to get
the simplest model as we can, so
in this example,
you're going to use AIC as our criterion.
And we're going to go with Arima(0,1,
2) model.
Now that we have decided that we're going
to fit Arima(0,1,2 model to our dataset,
I'm going to use SARIMA
routine from astsa package.
Now that we have loaded astsa package,
were going to say Sarima S stands for
seasonal autoregressive
integrated moving average models.
Which is going to be our
subject in week five.
Sarima, you have number_of_births, and
we have this 0, 1,
2 basically this is p, d, q, and for
now lets just ignore this last
three perimeters 0, 0, 0.
If I want this command,
it gives me a lot of things.
For example, it gives me my call and
my coefficients.
And it actually gives me the coefficients
here with their standard errors.
So ma1 coefficient is negative 0.85,
11 and
this is ma2 coefficient,
this is our constants.
If you look at this p-values
it means that ma1 and
ma2 coefficients are significant
at the level of 0.05 maybe
the constant is not significant but
we can keep this our model.
Now that we have fit ARIMA (0,1,2) model
to our data set, we have the following.
We have (1- B)Xt,
this 1- B is the differencing,
because of order 1, B = 1.
And we have 2 moving average terms, which
are right here, Zt -1 and Zt- 2 terms.
We have no autoregressive terms,
this is the constant, and
Zt is the current noise.
The numbers in the indices are shown
here as the standard errors of
these coefficients.
Thus, if I put (Xt- 1)
to the right hand side,
we have the following Arima (0,1,2) model.
Xt = Xt- 1, this is because of
differencing, we have a constant,
we have a noise right now for
current time.
And we have dependence on the previous
two noises, Zt -1 and Zt-1.
Now from Sarima routine we have
seen that Zt which is assumed to
be normally distributed,
has expectation 0 and a variance 49.08.
So what have we learned?
We have learned how to fit an ARIMA
model to a real world dataset using
various fitting tools such as ACF,
PACF and AIC.
And we have learned
examining Ljung-Box test for
resting correlation or
autoorrelation actually in a time series.